hello everyone uh thanks for uh turning
out those of you who are not in physics
coming here in the uh in the rain it's
my pleasure to introduce Professor David
Deutsch who's going to speak to us today
um many of you will know David's name
it's not controversial to say he's one
of the key individuals who really
um kicked off the field that has become
the field of quantum information and
Quantum information technology which as
you know Oxford now has a very large and
leading role in the UK and in the world
uh David's uh really first paper that
people recognized was the one that went
on to be described as the Deutsche
algorithm and that was in 85 he's
continued to contribute to the field
over the intervening years in particular
um soon afterwards in 87 there was an
important paper on Quantum networks and
when I became interested in this build
myself in the 90s David's work was one
of the the key Inspirations for me so
David is based in headington and is kind
of Perpetual visiting Professor here in
physics and in 2008 he became a fellow
of the Royal Society recognized for his
work in Quantum information in 2013 uh
David
is now the lead researcher in a project
on constructive theory which I guess
we're about to hear some more about
um with uh Kiara that's Kiara so uh
Kiara is the postdoc and if you want to
know more you can either talk to me or
David or Kiara so uh David without any
further thank you
right well
um the ideas I'm going to talk about
today are part of constructive theory
which I've been working on with Chiara
myletto
and among among other things
constructive theory uses a new mode of
explanation of physical reality
through which we hope to eliminate a lot
more than just probability a whole load
of explanatory dead weight and blind
alleys from physics and from other
sciences and even Beyond science
what's a mode of explanation well
at present the prevailing mode
which is mistakenly thought to be the
most fundamental is like this there are
particles and there are fields in
space-time
and they obey laws of motion and initial
conditions and once you know those you
can predict the whole of the rest of
their behavior
but there are other modes of explanation
uh in in common use in physics and
elsewhere and
here are some of them
uh no yes
good
um
just for illustration I'm mainly going
to talk about the probabilistic mode
that I put in red there
but as I said constructive theory seeks
to
unify and to underlie
all those
modes and others with a single mode of
explanation the Constructor theoretic
mode
which is explanation via the dichotomy
between
Transformations that it's possible to
bring about accurately and ones that
it's not possible to bring about
accurately
and those are possible and impossible
tasks
now the basic principle of Constructor
Theory
is that just that all the laws of
physics are expressible in that way
since every task is supposed to be
either definitively possible or
impossible to perform
there can't be such a thing as a task
being
possible with a given probability
not not zero or one
and at the fundamental level such things
might arise as approximations but that
that's not a description of reality and
therefore there's no place for
probability according to Constructor
Theory there's no place for probability
or random processes
at the foundations of physics
however
I'm not going to make the case against
probability from Constructor Theory
today it's more like the other way
around this is a motivation for
constructive theory because
independently of constructive theory the
world just is not probabilistic it's an
illusion and the probabilistic mode of
explanation
has about the same status as the Flat
Earth theory uh you you namely
you might you might find it useful to
use the predictions of the Flat Earth
theory when you're planning out your
garden
but when you're thinking about what the
world is like and even more when you're
thinking about what the laws of nature
are it would be hopeless
the
theory of the Flat Earth would just be
an impediment to understanding what's
out there
so same is true of probability and
so let me explain
well
probability and
the associated Concepts such as a
stochastic process that that produces a
random sequence of outcomes
these weren't originally invented for
any purpose in physics or any
fundamental purpose
the basic mathematical theory of
probability
namely
certain numbers attached to certain
elements of a set which then obey axioms
like they will add up to one and stuff
um was invented in the 16th century by
people
who only wanted to win at games of
chance
uh this is one of them
cardano
um
and that started off Game Theory and
game theorists
use the idea of a random sequence
as a mathematical model
of physical acts that are integral to
games of chance such as shuffling a pack
of cards or throwing dice
and probability
via the central concept of equally
likely
was a mathematical model for the
intuitive idea of
Fair shuffling of cards a fair dice Fair
Dice and fair throw of the dice
so
when I when I say that which is also
essential to games of chance
um when I say this was merely a
mathematical model
perhaps I should say more clearly what I
mean
I mean that they didn't assume that
anything in the physical world
shuffling cards and so on was literally
what we would today call a stochastic
process
that it literally had properties such as
probability
that's because first of all
the properties that they actually needed
from shuffling cards were far weaker
than full literal randomness
they were basically that the outcomes of
shuffling
should be fair and Equitable among the
players
and unpredictable to them
so that that meant that the the outcomes
were not related in any simple way to
any sequence or algorithm that they
could call to mind or or execute during
playing the game so most pseudorandom
sequences would have done just as well
if they'd had computers then
and secondly more importantly
I don't think it would even have
occurred to them to connect their
probability in their model with some
real physical quantity because classical
physics which was in its infancy at the
time of cardano but a bit later when it
was perfected
was deterministic and therefore
inconsistent with stochastic processes
happening in nature
so
why did those game theorists splitely
use the mathematical axioms
probability theory that were both far
too strong and already ruled out by what
was known about fundamental physics well
simple by being too strong that's
harmless they they certain that meant
they certainly satisfied the conditions
that that were necessary for analyzing
games
and
the real properties that they really
wanted such as fairness and so on
couldn't be expressed precisely
mathematically by the way they can be
precise expressed precisely in
constructive theory but that's another
story
um
consequently it didn't matter also that
their model relied on Impossible physics
because
the conclusions about game playing
if there had been that impossible
physics led to the same conclusions
about strategy and tactics as for the
real physics
so it didn't matter for them
there's another reason
why they might have been blase about the
connection between their Theory and
physics
certainly this was a move made later in
Game Theory and in probability Theory up
to the present day
might have regarded the probabilities
not as attributes of the dice and the
cards or the dealer
but as attributes of the player
receiving the cards
that's the subjective interpretation of
probability and I'll come back to it in
a moment but note already that
whatever role the subjective State of
Mind of the player may play in this
story
fairness must depend on physical
properties of the cards and dice and how
they're treated during the game and
therefore Game Theory must in principle
be rooted in some sort of model of those
objects and processes
anyway from that theory
game theorists derived maxims for
playing games of chance such as in poker
never draw to an inside straight
and uh
the important thing is that this was a
narrow
parochial application of a mathematical
trick the theory of probability indeed
the reason that game theory was possible
at all
was that its conclusions don't depend on
the detailed physics of any game playing
processes it didn't matter what the
orbits of the planets are it didn't
matter what matter is made of or let
alone anything deeper about the laws of
physics
the theory was directed specifically at
modeling a particular human social
behavior
which even other animals don't do let
alone
um the physical World At Large so it
should be very surprising
that this little mathematical trick had
the theory of probability has found
further applications
in a very diverse fields in science and
and Beyond and even that it seems to be
fundamental to some of those fields so
here are some of them
roughly in the historical order of their
invention
so we'd be surprised if if say the seven
of diamonds appeared in a law of physics
but probability which has the same
provenance as the seven of diamonds
seems to be Central to physics in
particular and it seems to work
so why would anyone want to expunge it
from physics and from every other
fundamental Theory
well of course we don't need a reason
physics likes to do without things
um
as we discover more and more about the
world we sometimes find out that things
that we thought existed don't exist
and such as
Celestial spheres and and uh the force
of gravity
and the trajectories of particles and so
on they were all thought to exist and
then discovering that they don't exist
was a great advance in understanding
but before we can decide that something
doesn't exist
we must explain what the world without
that thing is like
and also preferably why thinking in
terms of that thing
seem to work
and why it was a useful fiction and why
it may still be a useful fiction
so compare
these two statements
yeah the first statement
specifies a factual observable
property of the world it specifies what
will happen
when poker is played and and specified
hands arise
but the second one
is not about physical facts it is
consistent with any sequence of cards
arising in a poker game and it's in fact
it's consistent with with any physical
events
such as someone repeatedly drawing to an
inside straight and repeatedly winning
not inconsistent yes it's true that it
was risky the second statement is true
all right
but it doesn't apparently refer
to any physical events that actually
happened in that case
one sometimes here's a sort of
desperate denial
of this
along the following lines
um
the statement it was too risky
is about the physical world it refers to
all the other players who drew to inside
straight and lost and it refers to the
fact that there are more of them they
outnumber the winners
well first of all it doesn't
there have only been finitely many poker
games in the world
um ignore for the moment the fact that
there are parallel universes and in
those uh particular player both wins and
loses in different Universe quantum
theory does in fact solve some of these
problems but not by counting the number
of players
so for the moment in in a given universe
or In classical physics
the proportion of players who drew to an
inside straight and lost
doesn't exactly equal the probability of
losing
just as repeated tosses of a fair coin
however it is don't result in equal
numbers of heads and tails in general
and anyway
since when do gamblers care about
whether other gamblers lose or win
if probability refers to other players
losing money it doesn't refer to any
physical fact about the game as it
actually was in the case that I cited
and the same holds for all probability
statements
so that that's meant to be in the second
column that's meant to be all
probability statements then that's the
dot dot dot
um
the blatant fact that is generally
overlooked
is that no statement from the second
column can ever imply any statement from
the first column
in other words assertions about
probabilities do not refer to the
physical world they don't assert
anything
about the physical world
frequencies like the fraction of winners
over losers historically are things that
happen in real life and therefore they
don't in general equal probabilities
it's no good saying that they equal them
approximately
because they don't they only probably
equal them approximately and that's a
statement from the second column
similarly you can't say that probability
statements are about what will happen in
the long run no they aren't all you can
do is deduce from them are statements
about what will probably happen in the
long run
but frequencies in an infinite sequence
of measurements of experiments
do equal the probabilities exactly and
this inspires yet another desperate
denial
to the effect that the finite sequences
are approximations
to infinite ones
but nothing about a finite subsequence
of an infinite sequence
can possibly follow
from a statement about relative
frequencies in the infinite sequence
unless the subsequence is a typical one
and tip statement that it's a typical
One belongs firmly in the second column
or you may take that subjective root
that I mentioned you could imagine that
probability statements are not
assertions about the world at all they
are assertions about our minds
probability being a measure of ignorance
or of degree of rational belief those
are two different subjective theories
called credence
that's no good for present purposes
because then you still need something to
connect statements about our minds to
statements about physical reality so to
this end
the philosopher David Lewis
proposed his principal principle that's
a principal principle
um
uh which just asserts as an axiom
that rational agents have the same
credences as the physical probabilities
but note that that gives no explanation
about why those physical purportedly
physical numbers should inform decisions
in that way
you might as well propose an axiom that
rational people in avoid black cats or
ladders
that's not physics
so
the upshot is that cardano and their
game theorists never did succeed after
all in their purpose of finding ways of
winning at games of chance
or of minimizing their losses
they only found ways of probably winning
and later people added these purported
philosophical principles that say a
rational person would do this or that
but actually a rational gambler
knows that
having probably one
no matter how often one does it won't
pay the rent
physically
physically it is most unlike actual
winning
so in case there still appear to be any
clothes on this emperor
because of the
mass of cultural interpretation that
that's been loaded onto it
just replace all the probabilistic terms
in the second column by magical terms
why
what physical reason is there
to allow statements in the second column
to inform Decisions by Fiat and not
statements in the third which you could
equally well connect to Reality by some
Fiat
so
there that's the magical column thanks
thanks a lot
so what I have called these desperate
denials of the of the firewall between
the First Column and the other two
are more commonly known as
interpretations of the probability
calculus
subjective interpretations field
frequency interpretation Ensemble
interpretations and all in many variants
regarded as attempts to connect the
second column with the first
they are all
like the examples I've given either
circular or meaningless or conflict with
the probability calculus or just don't
do what they say they do
this discussion that I've just given
about the defects in theory of
probability draws on the work of David
papino who's a philosopher of
probability
he has called this situation
at the heart of his field a scandal
probability Concepts and language and uh
and the whole Theory simply form a
closed system
of statements and ideas that just refer
to each other and can never yield a
statement about the physical world
now if we go back to the applications of
probability we can see
that there is a common feature running
through all of them
they are all in a certain sense and
slightly different senses they're all
normative that is to say they're about
at root how one should act if one were
to believe that certain potential events
have particular probabilities now how
one should act is rather a strange thing
for a scientific theory to talk about
you know you can't get an ought from an
is
in fact
the firewall between factual statements
and moral statements exists for a very
similar reason to the one separating
factual statements from probability ones
so
another way of papering over the divide
or ignoring it
is by different kind of Fiat
one simply puts a normative statement
about probabilities into the physical
Theory
that's called a stochastic physical
there are many ways of expressing that
that Fiat here's one
so
it contains a lot of hidden stuff it
pretends only to contain that first
first row
but
um
actually
uh there are some purportedly factual
statements about numbers that
purportedly have something to do with
physics and then there has to be a
principle to give them some normative
psychological meaning second row and
then the third row actually you need
another Axiom from decision Theory to
say how one should actually behave
rather than how one should think and
this is weird
but luckily
it so happens
that the only stochastic theory that has
ever been proposed in the history of
science
for as a fundamental description of the
world is quantum theory
in its mid 20th century State Vector
collapse form
and in that form its probabilistic part
is called the born rule
which says that if and only if
an observable is measured then the
probabilities of the various outcomes
are the moduli squared of those
coefficients
and the bottom line there by the way
does anyone here actually believe that
the state Vector collapse occurs in
physical reality
show of hands
okay no good
oh so
um so one one person so you have my
sympathy and I hope you'll see in what
follows that that help is at hand
closer than you think
so because
um
well uh
help is at hand because
ordinary unitary non-collapse quantum
theory provides in large part the way
out of that whole probability scandal
it's called the decision theoretic
approach
sometimes called the decision theoretic
approach to the born rule or to
probability but those are both misnomers
because neither the born rule nor
probability nor collapse of course
ever appear in the decision theoretic
argument in its simplest form it goes
like this
we imagine an array of gaming machines
one armed Bandits
in in a casino so there's a whole lot
array of them
and you play by inserting one Casino
token and then when you pull the handle
the machine prepares a Quantum system in
inside itself in a state PSI and then
measures an observable X of that system
it then displays the result as shown in
red on the middle panel
and that will therefore always be an
eigenvalue of x
and then the machine delivers a payoff
of that number of Casino tokens which it
need not be a whole number we're
allowing fractional tokens if if x has
non-integer eigenvalues
different machines in this casino are
identical except for the state PSI which
is constant for each machine but
different for different machines
but the size not a secret it's written
on the front of the machine just like
this
conveniently expressed as a
superposition of eigenstates of the
observable X
now
for machines whose PSI
is a single eigenvalue of x
with eigenvalue little X
then playing on that machine is not a
game of chance
it's it's just a matter of putting in
one token and receiving back Little X
tokens let's call that a classical
machine
because it could be implemented without
Quantum systems
without Quantum technology
so
other things being equal
a rational player would be willing to
play on any classical machine
that has little X greater than one and
unwilling to play when it has little X
less than one
what about cases when PSI is not an
eigenstate of X what then is the
dividing line between being worth
playing and not being worth playing well
let's call the dividing line
for for a state for a machine operating
with States PSI let's call that dividing
line V of PSI
and uh this is perhaps a little bit of a
wordy definition but it's just the
maximum amount of money that the player
would be willing to pay for the
privilege of playing it with that
machine
so for a classical machine
um PSI is an einstate of X and V of PSI
is just the eigenvalue well some other
facts about V of PSI in more General PSI
or obvious too
we don't need probability or the born
rule or anything for example if the if
the state is a superposition of
eigenstates of X all of you whose
eigenvalues are greater than one then
Elementary rationality says that it's
worth playing because whatever the
outcome
the machine will give you more than the
one token that you put in
and similarly for a superposition with
all eigenvalues less than one
it's not worth playing that is it's not
worth playing in the token winning sense
of the game theorists
you might well play for fun
but then you're being paid partly in fun
so let's ignore that complication
but now what if the hard case what if
PSI is a superposition of two
eigenstates let's say one with
eigenvalue below one and one with
eigenvalue above one
well in collapse quantum theory with the
bone Rule and everything
that tells us that for for General
States PSI the probabilities of the
respective outcomes are those
coefficients squared and then the
principal principle tells us to adjust
our credences
to match those numbers though it doesn't
say why
and The probabilistic Game Theory tells
us that a rational player should value
playing such a machine the same as if it
were guaranteed to produce that
expectation value
again doesn't say why
in general
axioms of stochastic theories are not
explanatory which alone should
disqualify them from being
um the part of any scientific theory and
fundamental science
but but I digress
um
now what about without collapse
well let's take a simple case of an
equal amplitude of superposition that's
you know
x with eigenvalues X1 and X2 each with
amplitudes one over root two so we're
aiming to prove without collapse or
anything
that with that the uh that V of x v of
uh that equal amplitude State sorry
will be the average of X1 and X2 so
that's what we want to prove
so here's the proof a quick and dirty
version of the proof that the devil is
in the detail which I'm not going to
talk about the details are
extensive but they lead to the same
conclusion
so first of all we need to note
two implications of Elementary
rationality
not probabilistic in any way
namely equations one and two
I'm stating them for a slightly uh more
General case but it doesn't matter that
the Theta is going to be Pi by 4 in the
end
so equation two says that V of PSI does
not depend on the objective exchange
value of Casino tokens so long as
they're additive
if the casino suddenly declares that
it's going to redeem tokens in pounds
instead of dollars
the relative order in which a rational
player values playing on different
machines will not change
so that's one implication of rationality
and and the other is expressed in
equation one
if two machines use superpositions where
each eigenvalue in in the expansion of
one of them is differs by constant K
from that in the other then the rational
players valuation of the two machines
also differs by that same constant K and
that's just because
um in that case the fir all the first
machine does is physically is the same
as this what the second one does plus
additionally paying out uh K tokens
now we make those substitutions
they're on uh on the slide
and it follows with a bit of algebra
that for the equal amplitude state vipsi
is indeed the expectation value of x in
that state and we can prove the same for
a general state
and that's QED
but look what we've done here
in in a deeper sense we've proved the
same conclusion
about
what rational players do
as we would have from classical
collapse quantum theory
but without assuming that collapse
happens
we've proved it without the born rule
without those axioms
and all that stuff
so we've done this on them
right hand side
whereas with collapsed quantum theory we
have to go through all that process on
the left hand side to get to the same
conclusion
so on the right hand side the only
assumptions are Elementary rationality
and unitary Quantum Theory without
without collapse
from the perspective of this talk
that means that we have dispensed with
probability both in nature in the
quantum world and in our minds if we
have any credences about the quantum
world because in nature as described by
quantum theory there are no stochastic
processes
and no credences
in the sense of beliefs with numerical
measures that obey the probability
calculus no credences affect
the decisions of any rational person
making decisions about Quantum systems
but it's even better than that
those decisions now
in on the right hand side
are not only derived but unlike in the
collapse case they are explained
because we don't have to introduce all
those unexplained postulates
and that also explains why collapse
Theory
despite its false assumptions
was and is successful in a particular
domain of application
so now let's look again at that list of
fundamental applications of probability
we can strike out quantum theory from
the list
and we can put a tentative Mark there
about credences too since we now know
that they're not needed in this
particular application
we've also eliminated
probability from the theory of games of
chance
that use
Quantum processes
where the chance element is generated by
Quantum indeterminacy so what about
games of chance in general
well recall what I said at the beginning
the probability is is a is a very large
Sledgehammer with which to crack the egg
of modeling things like Fair dice
now we see that the same job could be
done by quantum theory as by the the uh
impossible physics that they assumed
since uh pseudorandom sequence would
have served the same purpose so would a
Quantum generated sequence
and for the same reason we can strike
out
the use of probabilities in general
decision Theory which is just
um Game Theory writ large
and in Actuarial science I just put that
in because it was historically a very
early application of probability
it measures It prepares the system in a
State sign
and then it measures an observable X on
that system
the result is the payout
just as in Game Theory the theory of
evolution
doesn't depend in any way on true
Randomness in the mutations all that
matters is that the theory can explain
how biological adaptations to an
environment
can evolve if the mutations aren't
systematic if they don't depend
systematically on the environment only
the selection is supposed to be
systematic that's the essence of theory
of evolution
and probability Randomness is just a
feature of the model convenience so we
can strike that out too from the theory
of evolution
strikeout theory of evolution by the way
Chiara has just published a paper about
the constructive theory of biology which
among other things describes evolution
without evoking Randomness in any way
of course by the by all these strikeouts
I don't mean that the mathematical
formalism of quantum theory isn't
sometimes useful
I'm saying that the that the
quantities called probabilities in that
formalism do not refer to any stochastic
random processes in nature nor to
anything in rational Minds such as
degrees of belief or Credence nothing in
physics or in minds thinking about
physics
so in information Theory probability was
again originally used as a model for an
even simpler thing namely
this could be any message of n Bits with
the the our
communication system needs to be able to
cope with any message of ambits and we
don't know which it's going to be and
this was translated in the model
to all 2 to the N strings are equally
likely
and this has caused all sorts of
confusion
such as people saying that a state
contains maximum information when it has
maximum entropy
which is nonsense and so on
but that's another story anyway we can
strike it out
I'll just say in passing that
constructive theoretic information
theory is also something that Kiara and
I have recently developed and it does
fulfill all the hopes that we have for
Constructor theory in general including
not being subject to the kind of
confusion about information that I just
mentioned
and it unifies classical and Quantum
information our paper on that is is was
published a while ago
so what's left
um Quantum statistical mechanics at
least doesn't need probability since it
has entanglement and and decoherence and
therefore it can Avail itself of what
I've just described about Quantum Theory
the decision theoretic approach
uh I should say why the universe is in
such a state as to make the laws of
thermodynamics hold
for example that it's uniform that it's
initially ordered and so on is a
substantive question
but it's not a probabilistic question
so we can strike that out too
so I'll leave striking out classical
statistical mechanics as an exercise for
the audience
now
experimental error that's an interesting
case
I think it was historically the earliest
application of probability after games
of chance
and it has some interesting
misconceptions in it in addition to
probability which uh which one of them
is as follows so
is connected with probabilities error
processes
in experiments are traditionally
categorized as random and systematic
but both of those are misleading terms
for for Simplicity just imagine a
measurement of a constant of nature such
as the speed of light and suppose that
we are asked to give an estimate
of the best error attainable with a
given instrument like viso's wheel
processes that were random with known
probabilities
would not be sources of error at all in
such in such a case since they could be
reduced without limit just by repeating
the experiment
but experiments so the important errors
are
the ones that affect
experiments through processes who's
governing the laws are unknown
that is the laws may be known but how
they affect the experiment is unknown
and those cause systematic errors
so ironically a a systematic error is
one that obeys no known system
so what does it mean to estimate
an error caused by the unknown
traditional to
go into probability and subjective
probability but as I've said that's all
nonsense so what can it mean well
suppose that a physical constant let's
say call it Chi is to be measured
and
and that the Bound for a given
technology is claimed to be
Epsilon
so if Little X is the average of of
measurements obtained with with
a particular instrument well the best
the best result obtainable with a
particular instrument
then the first line x minus Chi modus of
x minus Chi is less than Epsilon we're
saying
and for Simplicity assume that the
individual outcomes that we obtain when
we do the experiment repeatedly with
different copies of the apparatus and so
on
our X1 and X2
then we have that both X1 and X2 both
obey that equation but that inequality
as well
and then just from some algebra it
follows that the average of X1 and X2
just as in the uh if they were random
errors
has a smaller error than either X1 or X2
separately
which is a contradiction because Epsilon
was supposed to be the best error
obtainable with that apparatus
so
systematic
experimental errors cannot be bounded by
any known bound
therefore among other things they can't
be described by probabilities
nor can our knowledge about them
these unknown variables in in science
are counter-intuitive and often
misunderstood
because we have been accustomed by
bayesianism and other subjective
philosophies
to replace real ignorance
by fantasy probabilities
but we've just seen that neither
physical probabilities nor
probability credences can enter the an
analysis of errors in a fundamental way
so what do we mean
when we estimate the error in an
experiment
well that turns out to be a big question
with surprising answers that there's no
time to go into here except I'll just
briefly mention I hope to complete a
paper on that quite soon
but I'll just briefly mention that what
what what an error estimate really means
is
it's the error
such that if the experimental result
turned out to differ from the true value
by more than that when the true value is
later discovered by some other method
then if it was more than that it would
make the theory of the apparatus
problematic
so that's in short what what an error
means but for present purposes we can
just strike out error analysis
uh
there
so Brownian motion uh that doesn't
actually purport to be a a fundamental
Theory since although it has a
stochastic law of motion that's assumed
to be an approximation to a more
microscopic cause such as impacts from
molecules
that aren't explicitly treated by the
theory of brown in motion so
that theory is also related to the
theory of errors
but in the approximation that the
so-called random errors are
swamping the systematic errors
although we've just seen that that's
something that cannot be known in a
particular case
but
if the unknown systematic errors are too
large
then it's not Brownian motion so we can
strike that out
and with it we can also strike out the
applications from High Finance
that are directly analogous to the
theory of Brownian motion
finally
since none of those other applications
of probability now involve stochastic
processes
they do not require credences either
doesn't matter what scientists think
what scientists believe
about whether a theory is true or false
so long as they execute rationality
and so bayesianism and the other
subjective interpretations of
probability have no remaining scientific
function
and for these purposes they can be
dropped too
now I hope I have shown you that
probability doesn't make sense as a
description or explanation of what
really happens
it can be a metaphor it can be a
technique
for calculation or an approximation in a
certain sense but a a an approximation
to make sense has to be an approximation
to something
so if probabilities are to inform
decisions in some approximate way there
has to be an explanation rooted in a
description of an actual physical world
in which events and processes happen
not probably happen and not just via
some ad hoc axioms so I hope I've also
persuaded you
that it's right and proper
to try to
expunge every trace of probability and
Randomness from our from the laws of
physics and from our conception of the
world and from the methodology of
science so that we may fully restore
realism
as well as rationality
it's a simplification a unification
and an elimination of nonsense
and it's true
now
I bet there are hard-headed
instrumentalists in the audience who
might be thinking okay so this
simplification is is all very nice and
elegant
but since the principle uses
of of the mathematics of probability are
largely unaffected
what really is the benefit of
eliminating it at the fundamental
fundamental level either
well it's true fundamental falsehoods
don't always rear up and bite you
you could believe in a flat Earth
as many people did for a long time and
and that falsehood may never have
affected your life or your thinking
on the other hand it might have
destroyed the entire human species
because belief in a flat Earth theory
as a description of reality
is incompatible with developing say
technology to avert asteroid strikes
similarly
a belief in probability
in quantum theory
may not prevent you from developing
quantum computers
Quantum algorithms
in practice
but because probability and the born
rule entail fundamental misconceptions
about the physical world
they could very well prevent you from
developing the successes of quantum
theory
and in particular
constructive theory is the framework in
which I suspect
successes to Quantum Theory will be
developed
as I said
Constructor theory is incompatible with
physical probabilities
so that is my case
thank you
[Applause]
thank you very much David uh just before
we take questions let me mention that
there's a website very easy to remember
Constructor Theory oneword.org where
you'll find many of the things that
David alluded to papers and so forth
fine okay I saw one hand go upstairs so
please
I'm sorry with the slot machine I'm
afraid I'm so far walking out of here
with no
understanding about how to modify the
way of thinking about a single machine
and ended up coming in so uh if someone
asked me how does how does what are the
funny numbers in the square roots mean
in front of the eigenous states in the
slot machine I would say well what those
funny numbers means I pull the handle
lots and lots of times then you know
forever one third of the time let me get
this this
one result yeah of the two thirds of the
time when we get this other result and
say well what do you which result will
you get next
um I don't I'm not I didn't understand
how to modify a way of thinking about
that based on the stuff you talked about
it
um well the idea is that
I'm not sure which version of quantum
theory or thinking in terms of possibly
collapse theory in which there is a way
I don't know right okay I I want to know
okay the way you should think about it
is not in terms of the outcomes the
outcomes are
an emergent property of in in some
complicated way what those coefficients
are are they're just a descript
descriptors of the state the state that
the thing is is prepared so for example
if it was a spin system it would be
prepared by rotating it in some way with
magnetic fields and and those
coefficients would depend on the angles
through which it's been rotated that's
what it actually means now what that
causes in our subjective experience
um do you need an interpretation of
quantum theory for that and
interestingly all we need
trust and the right interpretation is
the many Universal interpretation but we
don't really need to draw on that for
these results we just have to say that
the motion is unitary
that's all the the
State exists physically and its motion
is unitary
another question
hello
I'd like to find out more about what you
think about
credences so I can go along with the
idea that it's very weird to have them
in a fundamental microphysical Theory
and if in future we find some Planet
Theory which is a deterministic we have
to wrestle with what that means well you
know yeah right now we don't have one
yeah
but there's a higher level concept they
seem to be useful in some kind of Asian
philosophy of science which doesn't
is not trying to talk about the
fundamental physics itself
so an observer people would say has a
Credence maybe if they don't know
exactly what the microstate of the real
world is and they have some
they have some idea that I think it's
within this region but I've got no
reason to differentiate between actual
microstates awesome so having no reason
is is so these are two slightly
different uh ways of doing a subjective
interpretation
the the first one where where you you uh
guess what the probabilities are
in some Theory and it's going to be a
an approximation to some microscopic
state that you don't know that's a
legitimate way of approximating
something
um you you have guessed what the
probabilities are and then then you can
test if Theory says that there's
something you can test with that so
uh
when you say you don't know which what
the microstates are then you're trying
to derive
Knowledge from ignorance
and that is simply logic logically not
valid and it's also inconsistent with
the probability calculus it's only by
sort of hand waving ignoring that fact
that one can apply Bayesian philosophy
in words to things like we don't know
what the state is if we don't know what
something is we don't know what it is so
if you know there's the standard
refutation of of that um
kind of subjective interpretation is if
there are three possibilities a b and c
you don't know anything about which
state it's in then you might say well
bet on whether it's a or either B or C
and then if that has if you if you say
that because you don't know
which of those two possibilities is
right that you must give them equal
probabilities then the same is true for
the for the permuted versions and that's
inconsistent
it's uh logically inconsistent so it
can't be used for that but it has a the
situation is very analogous to the Flat
Earth theory when you use the the when
you assume that your garden is a plain
surface
you're not assuming the Flat Earth
theory you're just assuming the
mathematics of the Flat Earth theory
applied to this process but there's no
way in which you are
assuming that the true thing is an
approximation to the Flat Earth it isn't
let's see up here so with your um
decision theoretic argument
is to uh to bypass the the principal
principle yes and the um
this this function B this evaluation
function
however you also asserted that it had
some um
some properties that it was it was
linear in the in the upper eigen values
of the
yes uh so and you also asserted that the
rational entity would uh no
we're assuming a rational entity who has
linear valuation so this same issue
arises In classical Game Theory as I
said
a person a real game player is not the
same as the idealized game player of of
um uh Game Theory a real gameplay has
all sorts of other motivations
um otherwise a real game player would
never play a game of chance such as
roulette where the expectation value of
your winnings is negative
so
we'd assume this idealized game player
the classical Game Theory and we assume
exactly the same player
in the decision theoretic approach to
quantum theorem so it's not because we
want to
say what
why people play games it's just this one
particular aspect of gameplay that has
probability
and it's that that it's analogous
between the two systems between the two
cases
made an assertion about how
Etc
how is that any more elegant to us
the principles no the assertion about
how the player behaves is the same in
both cases we're analyzing how a player
who believes a particular thing
will behave
we're not saying that any real player
actually behaves like that no real
player does exactly
take another question I
thing is you're eliminating the
distinction between epistemological
chance and ontological chance
um I'm saying that epistemological
chance well yes I am I'm I'm saying that
neither of them exist
but ontological Chance can be a good
approximation in some situations an
epistemological chance really should be
dispensed with altogether okay
there could be two kinds one where we
don't know enough about the system to be
able to calculate the outcome yes
there's another kind which in which even
if we did know everything we would not
be able to compute the outcome because
yes
an effective archaeological sense well
no that's a particular situation again
in which the probability calculus may be
a good approximation
rather like uh
if we if we think about the distribution
of the digits of pi
then it's it's a meaningful
approximation to say Well they're going
to be random they're not really random
but the mathematics of them
has enough in common with the
mathematics of truly random sequences
for it to be a good approximation for
some purposes but obviously not for all
purposes
so the common feature is just that
develop what we call it they're just
unpredictable whether it's ontological
or epistemological yes unpredictability
can be modeled by Randomness sometimes
time for one more question and then I
suspect David's happy to hang around for
a few minutes afterwards so those of you
who didn't get to ask a question and
then you
know whatever I see one thing
um yeah I just wanted to come back to
something new uh
um about you seem to be wanting to
expunge probability
um but you want to seem to be wanting to
do this by replacing it with the
decision theoretic governance you in
which
are made with respect to some admittedly
non-existent player of some game that is
probably also not being played yes so
I'm really struggling to see how that is
any more desirable than any of the other
approaches to the admittedly
philosophically problematic probability
yes so
um
the main advantage is it doesn't assert
anything false about reality well it's
it's asserting that some that reality
has something to do with
them no no it's just saying that if if
so it's taken an idealized
game
with idealized processes happening both
for randomizing and for the players and
it's analyzing how those players would
behave if they believed some rashes if
they if they conform to some elements of
rationality that have nothing to do with
probability but just that entire
argument is going to factor
yes it's counterfactual but then you
need an argument to say that a real
situation
um resembles that idealized situation in
particular ways so if if
um if I go into a casino to play
roulette obviously I'm not satisfying
the
um axioms of Game Theory because I'm
playing a game which has an expectation
value is negative of winning on the
other hand
if I play poker and I'm good at it and
then I wonder whether
um whether to draw or or not or how much
to how much to bet then I can use Game
Theory because and only because
I guess
that my real situation resembles the
idealized situation in the relevant ways
but it's only as good as that it's not a
theory of reality but it's so it's based
as you say
yes
exactly so
inside me right now I'm assuming that
there are carbon 14 atoms decaying
that there is no one's doing that Game
of Thrones
but there's no sensible way in which you
can compare it to an idealized oh making
that game's job talking about those
length of time
okay so I think we'll just let David
replace that
okay well uh you can if you want to work
out the half-life then you simply have
to imagine a situation in which these
game players bet on how long it will
take and what the rational thing for
them to do is and you'll find that the
rational thing for them to do is to bet
on an exponential decay
and that's the problem
so once more equipment
[Applause]